CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to The Vault

Thank you for your interest in contributing to The Vault! This document provides guidelines and instructions for contributing to the project.

## Table of Contents

- [Development Setup](#development-setup)
- [Code Style Guidelines](#code-style-guidelines)
- [Testing Requirements](#testing-requirements)
- [Pull Request Process](#pull-request-process)
- [Commit Message Conventions](#commit-message-conventions)

## Development Setup

### Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure you have the following installed:

- **Node.js**: Version 20.x or higher
- **npm**: Version 9.x or higher (comes with Node.js)
- **Git**: For version control

### Installation

1. **Fork and clone the repository**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/yourusername/the-vault.git
   cd the-vault
   ```

2. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

3. **Verify installation**
   ```bash
   npm run lint
   npm run test
   ```

### Development Workflow

1. **Create a feature branch**
   ```bash
   git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
   ```
   Or for bug fixes:
   ```bash
   git checkout -b fix/your-bug-fix
   ```

2. **Run the development server**
   ```bash
   npm run electron:dev
   ```
   This will:
   - Build the Electron main process
   - Start the Vite dev server
   - Launch the Electron application

3. **Make your changes**
   - Edit files in `src/` for React components
   - Edit files in `electron/` for main process code
   - The app will hot-reload automatically

4. **Run tests**
   ```bash
   # Run all tests
   npm run test

   # Run tests in watch mode
   npm run test:watch

   # Run tests with UI
   npm run test:ui

   # Run tests with coverage
   npm run test:coverage
   ```

5. **Check code quality**
   ```bash
   npm run lint
   ```

6. **Build for production** (optional, to verify build works)
   ```bash
   npm run build:all
   ```

## Code Style Guidelines

### TypeScript

- **Strict Mode**: All code must pass TypeScript strict mode checks
- **No `any` types**: Avoid using `any` unless absolutely necessary. Use `unknown` or proper types instead
- **Type Definitions**: Define types in `src/types/` for shared types
- **Path Aliases**: Use path aliases (`@/` for `src/`, `@electron/` for `electron/`)

Example:
```typescript
// Good
import { ArchiveFile } from '@/types';
import { logger } from '@electron/utils/logger';

// Avoid
import { ArchiveFile } from '../../types';
```

### React Components

- **Functional Components**: Use functional components with hooks
- **Component Structure**: 
  ```typescript
  // Component props interface
  interface ComponentProps {
    prop1: string;
    prop2?: number;
  }

  // Component with proper typing
  export const Component: React.FC<ComponentProps> = ({ prop1, prop2 }) => {
    // Component logic
    return <div>{prop1}</div>;
  };
  ```

- **Hooks**: 
  - Use custom hooks for complex logic (`src/hooks/`)
  - Follow React hooks rules (only call at top level)
  - Extract reusable logic into custom hooks

- **File Naming**: 
  - Components: `PascalCase.tsx` (e.g., `Gallery.tsx`)
  - Hooks: `camelCase.ts` with `use` prefix (e.g., `useArchive.ts`)
  - Utils: `camelCase.ts` (e.g., `pathValidator.ts`)

### Code Organization

- **Component Files**: One component per file
- **Test Files**: Co-locate test files with source files (e.g., `Component.test.tsx` next to `Component.tsx`)
- **Utils**: Place utility functions in appropriate `utils/` directories
- **Imports**: Group imports in this order:
  1. External dependencies
  2. Internal modules (using path aliases)
  3. Relative imports
  4. Types

Example:
```typescript
import React, { useState, useEffect } from 'react';
import { motion } from 'framer-motion';

import { useArchive } from '@/hooks/useArchive';
import { logger } from '@electron/utils/logger';

import { ArchiveFile } from '@/types';
```

### Naming Conventions

- **Variables/Functions**: `camelCase`
- **Components**: `PascalCase`
- **Constants**: `UPPER_SNAKE_CASE` for constants, `camelCase` for exported constants
- **Types/Interfaces**: `PascalCase`
- **Files**: Match the export (component files use `PascalCase.tsx`, others use `camelCase.ts`)

### Code Comments

- **Document complex logic**: Add comments explaining why, not what
- **JSDoc for functions**: Document public functions with JSDoc comments
- **Avoid obvious comments**: Code should be self-documenting

Example:
```typescript
/**
 * Validates a file path to ensure it's within the vault directory.
 * Prevents directory traversal attacks.
 * 
 * @param filePath - The path to validate
 * @param vaultRoot - The root directory of the vault
 * @returns True if the path is valid, false otherwise
 */
export function validatePath(filePath: string, vaultRoot: string): boolean {
  // Implementation
}
```

### Electron Main Process

- **IPC Handlers**: Define handlers in `electron/main.ts`
- **Error Handling**: Always handle errors and log them using the logger utility
- **Path Validation**: Always validate paths before file operations
- **Async Operations**: Use async/await for file operations

Example:
```typescript
ipcMain.handle('operation-name', async (_event, param: string) => {
  try {
    // Validate input
    if (!param || typeof param !== 'string') {
      throw new Error('Invalid parameter');
    }

    // Perform operation
    const result = await performOperation(param);
    
    return { success: true, data: result };
  } catch (error) {
    logger.error('Operation failed:', error);
    return { success: false, error: error instanceof Error ? error.message : 'Unknown error' };
  }
});
```

## Testing Requirements

### Test Coverage

- **Minimum Coverage**: Aim for 80% code coverage
- **CI Requirements**: CI enforces 80% coverage thresholds
- **Critical Paths**: 100% coverage for security-critical code (path validation, file operations)

### Writing Tests

- **Test Files**: Co-locate with source files (`.test.ts` or `.test.tsx`)
- **Test Structure**: Use `describe` blocks for grouping, `it` or `test` for individual tests
- **Test Utilities**: Use utilities from `src/test-utils/` for common setup

Example:
```typescript
import { describe, it, expect, vi } from 'vitest';
import { render, screen } from '@testing-library/react';
import { Component } from './Component';

describe('Component', () => {
  it('renders correctly', () => {
    render(<Component prop1="test" />);
    expect(screen.getByText('test')).toBeInTheDocument();
  });

  it('handles user interaction', async () => {
    const { user } = render(<Component prop1="test" />);
    const button = screen.getByRole('button');
    await user.click(button);
    expect(screen.getByText('clicked')).toBeInTheDocument();
  });
});
```

### Running Tests

```bash
# Run all tests once
npm run test

# Run tests in watch mode (development)
npm run test:watch

# Run tests with UI (interactive)
npm run test:ui

# Run tests with coverage report
npm run test:coverage

# Run tests with CI coverage thresholds
npm run test:coverage:ci
```

### Test Types

- **Unit Tests**: Test individual functions and components in isolation
- **Integration Tests**: Test interactions between components and hooks
- **E2E Tests**: Test complete user workflows (when applicable)

### Mocking

- **Electron APIs**: Mock Electron APIs in tests (see `src/test-utils/mocks.ts`)
- **File System**: Mock file system operations for tests
- **External Dependencies**: Mock external services and APIs

## Pull Request Process

### Before Submitting

1. **Update your branch**
   ```bash
   git checkout main
   git pull origin main
   git checkout your-branch
   git rebase main
   ```

2. **Run all checks**
   ```bash
   npm run lint
   npm run test
   npm run build:all
   ```

3. **Ensure tests pass**: All tests must pass before submitting

4. **Update documentation**: If adding features, update relevant documentation

### Creating a Pull Request

1. **Push your branch**
   ```bash
   git push origin your-branch
   ```

2. **Create PR on GitHub**
   - Use a descriptive title
   - Fill out the PR template (if available)
   - Reference any related issues

3. **PR Description Template**
   ```markdown
   ## Description
   Brief description of changes

   ## Type of Change
   - [ ] Bug fix
   - [ ] New feature
   - [ ] Breaking change
   - [ ] Documentation update

   ## Testing
   - [ ] Tests pass locally
   - [ ] Added tests for new functionality
   - [ ] Updated existing tests

   ## Checklist
   - [ ] Code follows style guidelines
   - [ ] Self-review completed
   - [ ] Comments added for complex code
   - [ ] Documentation updated
   - [ ] No new warnings generated
   - [ ] Tests added/updated
   - [ ] All tests pass
   ```

### Branch Naming

- **Features**: `feature/feature-name` (e.g., `feature/add-search`)
- **Bug Fixes**: `fix/bug-description` (e.g., `fix/pdf-extraction-error`)
- **Documentation**: `docs/update-readme`
- **Refactoring**: `refactor/component-name`
- **Chores**: `chore/update-dependencies`

### Review Process

- **Automated Checks**: PR must pass all CI checks (linting, tests, build)
- **Code Review**: At least one maintainer must approve
- **Address Feedback**: Respond to review comments and make requested changes
- **Keep PRs Focused**: One feature/fix per PR when possible

## Commit Message Conventions

We follow [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/) specification.

### Format

```
<type>(<scope>): <subject>

<body>

<footer>
```

### Types

- **feat**: New feature
- **fix**: Bug fix
- **docs**: Documentation changes
- **style**: Code style changes (formatting, missing semicolons, etc.)
- **refactor**: Code refactoring
- **test**: Adding or updating tests
- **chore**: Maintenance tasks (dependencies, build config, etc.)
- **perf**: Performance improvements
- **ci**: CI/CD changes

### Scope (Optional)

Scope indicates the area of the codebase affected:
- `pdf`: PDF extraction functionality
- `archive`: Vault/archive system
- `ui`: User interface components
- `electron`: Electron main process
- `build`: Build configuration
- `deps`: Dependencies

### Examples

```bash
# Feature
feat(archive): add search functionality to vault

# Bug fix
fix(pdf): handle corrupted PDF files gracefully

# Documentation
docs: update installation instructions

# Refactoring
refactor(ui): extract Gallery component logic into hook

# Test
test(archive): add tests for case folder creation

# Chore
chore(deps): update electron to 28.1.0

# Breaking change
feat(archive)!: change vault directory structure

BREAKING CHANGE: Vault directory structure has changed. Existing vaults need migration.
```

### Commit Body (Optional)

Use the body to explain:
- **What**: What changed
- **Why**: Why the change was made
- **How**: How the change was implemented (if relevant)

### Commit Footer (Optional)

Use footer for:
- Breaking changes: `BREAKING CHANGE: <description>`
- Issue references: `Closes #123`, `Fixes #456`

### Best Practices

- **Keep commits atomic**: One logical change per commit
- **Write clear subjects**: Use imperative mood ("add feature" not "added feature")
- **Limit subject length**: Keep under 72 characters
- **Use body for details**: If more explanation needed, use the body
- **Reference issues**: Link to related issues in footer

## Additional Resources

- [TypeScript Handbook](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/intro.html)
- [React Documentation](https://react.dev/)
- [Electron Documentation](https://www.electronjs.org/docs/latest)
- [Vitest Documentation](https://vitest.dev/)
- [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/)

## Questions?

If you have questions about contributing, please:
- Open an issue with the `question` label
- Check existing issues and discussions
- Review the codebase for examples

Thank you for contributing to The Vault!

Commit message:

Enforce Node.js/npm versions and lockfile consistency
Add .npmrc and .nvmrc for consistent dependency management and Node.js version enforcement. Update package.json with engines field, and revise documentation to use 'npm ci' for reproducible installs. These changes reduce package-lock.json diffs, improve cross-platform consistency, and clarify setup instructions for contributors.

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to The Vault

Thank you for your interest in contributing to The Vault! This document provides guidelines and instructions for contributing to the project.

## Table of Contents

- [Development Setup](#development-setup)
- [Code Style Guidelines](#code-style-guidelines)
- [Testing Requirements](#testing-requirements)
- [Pull Request Process](#pull-request-process)
- [Commit Message Conventions](#commit-message-conventions)

## Development Setup

### Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure you have the following installed:

- **Node.js**: Version 20.x or higher
- **npm**: Version 9.x or higher (comes with Node.js)
- **Git**: For version control

### Installation

1. **Fork and clone the repository**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/yourusername/the-vault.git
   cd the-vault
   ```

2. **Set up Node.js version** (if using nvm)
   ```bash
   nvm use
   ```
   This will automatically use the Node.js version specified in `.nvmrc` (Node.js 20.x)

3. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
   npm ci
   ```
   **Note**: We use `npm ci` for reproducible installs. It installs dependencies directly from `package-lock.json`, ensuring you get the exact same dependency versions as other developers. If `package-lock.json` is missing, you may need to run `npm install` first to generate it.

3. **Verify installation**
   ```bash
   npm run lint
   npm run test
   ```

### Development Workflow

1. **Create a feature branch**
   ```bash
   git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
   ```
   Or for bug fixes:
   ```bash
   git checkout -b fix/your-bug-fix
   ```

2. **Run the development server**
   ```bash
   npm run electron:dev
   ```
   This will:
   - Build the Electron main process
   - Start the Vite dev server
   - Launch the Electron application

3. **Make your changes**
   - Edit files in `src/` for React components
   - Edit files in `electron/` for main process code
   - The app will hot-reload automatically

4. **Run tests**
   ```bash
   # Run all tests
   npm run test

   # Run tests in watch mode
   npm run test:watch

   # Run tests with UI
   npm run test:ui

   # Run tests with coverage
   npm run test:coverage
   ```

5. **Check code quality**
   ```bash
   npm run lint
   ```

6. **Build for production** (optional, to verify build works)
   ```bash
   npm run build:all
   ```

## Code Style Guidelines

### TypeScript

- **Strict Mode**: All code must pass TypeScript strict mode checks
- **No `any` types**: Avoid using `any` unless absolutely necessary. Use `unknown` or proper types instead
- **Type Definitions**: Define types in `src/types/` for shared types
- **Path Aliases**: Use path aliases (`@/` for `src/`, `@electron/` for `electron/`)

Example:
```typescript
// Good
import { ArchiveFile } from '@/types';
import { logger } from '@electron/utils/logger';

// Avoid
import { ArchiveFile } from '../../types';
```

### React Components

- **Functional Components**: Use functional components with hooks
- **Component Structure**: 
  ```typescript
  // Component props interface
  interface ComponentProps {
    prop1: string;
    prop2?: number;
  }

  // Component with proper typing
  export const Component: React.FC<ComponentProps> = ({ prop1, prop2 }) => {
    // Component logic
    return <div>{prop1}</div>;
  };
  ```

- **Hooks**: 
  - Use custom hooks for complex logic (`src/hooks/`)
  - Follow React hooks rules (only call at top level)
  - Extract reusable logic into custom hooks

- **File Naming**: 
  - Components: `PascalCase.tsx` (e.g., `Gallery.tsx`)
  - Hooks: `camelCase.ts` with `use` prefix (e.g., `useArchive.ts`)
  - Utils: `camelCase.ts` (e.g., `pathValidator.ts`)

### Code Organization

- **Component Files**: One component per file
- **Test Files**: Co-locate test files with source files (e.g., `Component.test.tsx` next to `Component.tsx`)
- **Utils**: Place utility functions in appropriate `utils/` directories
- **Imports**: Group imports in this order:
  1. External dependencies
  2. Internal modules (using path aliases)
  3. Relative imports
  4. Types

Example:
```typescript
import React, { useState, useEffect } from 'react';
import { motion } from 'framer-motion';

import { useArchive } from '@/hooks/useArchive';
import { logger } from '@electron/utils/logger';

import { ArchiveFile } from '@/types';
```

### Naming Conventions

- **Variables/Functions**: `camelCase`
- **Components**: `PascalCase`
- **Constants**: `UPPER_SNAKE_CASE` for constants, `camelCase` for exported constants
- **Types/Interfaces**: `PascalCase`
- **Files**: Match the export (component files use `PascalCase.tsx`, others use `camelCase.ts`)

### Code Comments

- **Document complex logic**: Add comments explaining why, not what
- **JSDoc for functions**: Document public functions with JSDoc comments
- **Avoid obvious comments**: Code should be self-documenting

Example:
```typescript
/**
 * Validates a file path to ensure it's within the vault directory.
 * Prevents directory traversal attacks.
 * 
 * @param filePath - The path to validate
 * @param vaultRoot - The root directory of the vault
 * @returns True if the path is valid, false otherwise
 */
export function validatePath(filePath: string, vaultRoot: string): boolean {
  // Implementation
}
```

### Electron Main Process

- **IPC Handlers**: Define handlers in `electron/main.ts`
- **Error Handling**: Always handle errors and log them using the logger utility
- **Path Validation**: Always validate paths before file operations
- **Async Operations**: Use async/await for file operations

Example:
```typescript
ipcMain.handle('operation-name', async (_event, param: string) => {
  try {
    // Validate input
    if (!param || typeof param !== 'string') {
      throw new Error('Invalid parameter');
    }

    // Perform operation
    const result = await performOperation(param);
    
    return { success: true, data: result };
  } catch (error) {
    logger.error('Operation failed:', error);
    return { success: false, error: error instanceof Error ? error.message : 'Unknown error' };
  }
});
```

## Testing Requirements

### Test Coverage

- **Minimum Coverage**: Aim for 80% code coverage
- **CI Requirements**: CI enforces 80% coverage thresholds
- **Critical Paths**: 100% coverage for security-critical code (path validation, file operations)

### Writing Tests

- **Test Files**: Co-locate with source files (`.test.ts` or `.test.tsx`)
- **Test Structure**: Use `describe` blocks for grouping, `it` or `test` for individual tests
- **Test Utilities**: Use utilities from `src/test-utils/` for common setup

Example:
```typescript
import { describe, it, expect, vi } from 'vitest';
import { render, screen } from '@testing-library/react';
import { Component } from './Component';

describe('Component', () => {
  it('renders correctly', () => {
    render(<Component prop1="test" />);
    expect(screen.getByText('test')).toBeInTheDocument();
  });

  it('handles user interaction', async () => {
    const { user } = render(<Component prop1="test" />);
    const button = screen.getByRole('button');
    await user.click(button);
    expect(screen.getByText('clicked')).toBeInTheDocument();
  });
});
```

### Running Tests

```bash
# Run all tests once
npm run test

# Run tests in watch mode (development)
npm run test:watch

# Run tests with UI (interactive)
npm run test:ui

# Run tests with coverage report
npm run test:coverage

# Run tests with CI coverage thresholds
npm run test:coverage:ci
```

### Test Types

- **Unit Tests**: Test individual functions and components in isolation
- **Integration Tests**: Test interactions between components and hooks
- **E2E Tests**: Test complete user workflows (when applicable)

### Mocking

- **Electron APIs**: Mock Electron APIs in tests (see `src/test-utils/mocks.ts`)
- **File System**: Mock file system operations for tests
- **External Dependencies**: Mock external services and APIs

## Pull Request Process

### Before Submitting

1. **Update your branch**
   ```bash
   git checkout main
   git pull origin main
   git checkout your-branch
   git rebase main
   ```

2. **Run all checks**
   ```bash
   npm run lint
   npm run test
   npm run build:all
   ```

3. **Ensure tests pass**: All tests must pass before submitting

4. **Update documentation**: If adding features, update relevant documentation

### Creating a Pull Request

1. **Push your branch**
   ```bash
   git push origin your-branch
   ```

2. **Create PR on GitHub**
   - Use a descriptive title
   - Fill out the PR template (if available)
   - Reference any related issues

3. **PR Description Template**
   ```markdown
   ## Description
   Brief description of changes

   ## Type of Change
   - [ ] Bug fix
   - [ ] New feature
   - [ ] Breaking change
   - [ ] Documentation update

   ## Testing
   - [ ] Tests pass locally
   - [ ] Added tests for new functionality
   - [ ] Updated existing tests

   ## Checklist
   - [ ] Code follows style guidelines
   - [ ] Self-review completed
   - [ ] Comments added for complex code
   - [ ] Documentation updated
   - [ ] No new warnings generated
   - [ ] Tests added/updated
   - [ ] All tests pass
   ```

### Branch Naming

- **Features**: `feature/feature-name` (e.g., `feature/add-search`)
- **Bug Fixes**: `fix/bug-description` (e.g., `fix/pdf-extraction-error`)
- **Documentation**: `docs/update-readme`
- **Refactoring**: `refactor/component-name`
- **Chores**: `chore/update-dependencies`

### Review Process

- **Automated Checks**: PR must pass all CI checks (linting, tests, build)
- **Code Review**: At least one maintainer must approve
- **Address Feedback**: Respond to review comments and make requested changes
- **Keep PRs Focused**: One feature/fix per PR when possible

## Commit Message Conventions

We follow [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/) specification.

### Format

```
<type>(<scope>): <subject>

<body>

<footer>
```

### Types

- **feat**: New feature
- **fix**: Bug fix
- **docs**: Documentation changes
- **style**: Code style changes (formatting, missing semicolons, etc.)
- **refactor**: Code refactoring
- **test**: Adding or updating tests
- **chore**: Maintenance tasks (dependencies, build config, etc.)
- **perf**: Performance improvements
- **ci**: CI/CD changes

### Scope (Optional)

Scope indicates the area of the codebase affected:
- `pdf`: PDF extraction functionality
- `archive`: Vault/archive system
- `ui`: User interface components
- `electron`: Electron main process
- `build`: Build configuration
- `deps`: Dependencies

### Examples

```bash
# Feature
feat(archive): add search functionality to vault

# Bug fix
fix(pdf): handle corrupted PDF files gracefully

# Documentation
docs: update installation instructions

# Refactoring
refactor(ui): extract Gallery component logic into hook

# Test
test(archive): add tests for case folder creation

# Chore
chore(deps): update electron to 28.1.0

# Breaking change
feat(archive)!: change vault directory structure

BREAKING CHANGE: Vault directory structure has changed. Existing vaults need migration.
```

### Commit Body (Optional)

Use the body to explain:
- **What**: What changed
- **Why**: Why the change was made
- **How**: How the change was implemented (if relevant)

### Commit Footer (Optional)

Use footer for:
- Breaking changes: `BREAKING CHANGE: <description>`
- Issue references: `Closes #123`, `Fixes #456`

### Best Practices

- **Keep commits atomic**: One logical change per commit
- **Write clear subjects**: Use imperative mood ("add feature" not "added feature")
- **Limit subject length**: Keep under 72 characters
- **Use body for details**: If more explanation needed, use the body
- **Reference issues**: Link to related issues in footer

## Additional Resources

- [TypeScript Handbook](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/intro.html)
- [React Documentation](https://react.dev/)
- [Electron Documentation](https://www.electronjs.org/docs/latest)
- [Vitest Documentation](https://vitest.dev/)
- [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/)

## Questions?

If you have questions about contributing, please:
- Open an issue with the `question` label
- Check existing issues and discussions
- Review the codebase for examples

Thank you for contributing to The Vault!
